>>: Hi, I'm Robbie Davis-Flyod.
I'm a Senior Research Fellow in
the Department of Anthropology
at the University
of Texas-Austin.
I'm a specialist in
medical anthropology
and cultural anthropology
and the anthropology
of reproduction, especially
focusing on childbirth delivery
and obstetrics.
I've been studying
birth and birth related
matters for the last
almost 30 years, I guess.
I got interested in that
subject because my first child
was born by cesarean and
I couldn't figure out why.
It didn't seem to me like it
was a necessary operation.
And I had to do a lot of
research to figure out that it
wasn't.
And then I started wondering
why I got hoodwinked
into a cesarean I didn't want.
I started-- being
an anthropologist,
I naturally started
asking other women
about their birth experiences.
Because that's
what we do when we
want to understand
something, we start
asking a lot of questions.
Our bottom line question
in anthropology is, why?
Why did this happen this way?
Why did you do this, this way?
Why did you make this choice,
and what does it mean?
Those are our two most
important questions,
why and what does it mean?
So I spent about
six or seven months
getting interested in
the field and questioning
women about their
own experiences,
questioning myself about why I
ended up with that experience.
And then it was time to take my
dissertation advisor to lunch
and pick a dissertation topic.
And she said, so
what's it gonna be?
And I said, well,
I've been studying
myth ritual and shamanism in
Mexico for several years now.
And I thought it was gonna be
that, but lately I've gotten
interested in this other thing.
There's something
really strange going on
with birth in the United States.
I said, it's such a
standardized procedure.
Every woman has her own
unique experience of it,
but the hospitals
and the doctors
treated in this very
institutional standardized way.
So I'm wondering, why is that?
And I said, what do you think?
And she said shamanism,
shamanism, shamanism.
Everybody and their dog
is studying shamanism.
She said, you do women things.
You do birth.
And I said, OK.
What birth is like in the
United States right now
is absolutely interventionist.
We don't have normal birth
in my country anymore.
I can say that with
some authority.
We have done major surveys
of women, Harris Poll style
surveys, called
Listening to Women,
that are conducted by Childbirth
Connection, a birth activist
group in New York.
And out of all the women
interviewed, maybe 3% of them
had normal births in hospitals.
I mean, the only place
you're gonna find normal,
in the sense of
un-interventionist spontaneous
birth, in the United States
today is at home or in birth
centers--
plus 3% in hospitals.
Everybody else has
highly interventionist
births-- everybody.
Doctors in my country
don't even know
what normal birth is anymore
because they never see it.
Nurses don't know what it is.
And even the midwives
barely know what it is.
They're trained
in it, in theory,
but they hardly
ever get to see it.
If you do want a normal
birth in a US hospital,
your best bet is with
a US nurse midwife--
because they at least try
to maintain some semblance
of normality in birth.
And they try to understand the
normal physiology of birth.
Doctors really have no education
in the normal physiology
of birth because they
never see normal birth,
nor do they have a value on it.
They think that
mechanizing birth and doing
a lot of cesareans
is safer and better.
That's how they're trained.
Unfortunately, as they
get trained more and more
in cesareans, they're being
de-skilled in other areas.
American obstetricians
no longer know
how to assist a breech
birth vaginally; or how
to use a vacuum extraction,
barely; or how to use forceps--
which can be very useful at
times to avoid cesareans.
But now instead of going
for the vacuum extraction
or the forceps
delivery, if you have
a lot of skill with
forceps, you tend
not to do much harm
with those forceps.
But doctors aren't even
bothering with the forceps
anymore.
They just go straight
to the cesarean.
So of course we're now at a 34%
cesarean rate in my country.
And we have hospitals with
50% and 60% cesarean rates.
Which, 10 years ago,
I would have said,
I don't think we're
ever gonna get there.
We had such a strong
activist birth movement
in the United States.
And we did such a good job
in the '80s and '90s of--
the '70s, '80s, and early
'90s of recovering VBAC.
Because, back in
the '50s and '60s,
the rule was, once a
cesarean, always a cesarean.
And it wasn't that
bad in those days.
Because, in 1970 in the US, we
had only a 6% cesarean rate.
So once a cesarean,
always a cesarean
was bad for that 6% of women.
But most women
didn't have cesareans
so it wasn't that big a deal.
Well, in 1985 Nancy Wainer
Cohen published "Silent Knife,"
which was the voices
of those 6% of women
who were having cesareans.
And then by 1985, it was
higher than that already.
By then, it was 23% or 24%.
And so once Nancy Wainer
published that book,
and we had a name for it, VBAC,
vaginal birth after cesarean,
that book was the catalyst
for a wave of birth activism
around restoring vaginal
birth after cesarean--
or getting rid of the once a
cesarean, always a cesarean
rule.
By then it'd become really
important to try to do that.
Because, as I said before, in
1970 in the US, or cesarean
rate was 6%.
By 1980, the cesarean
rate was 23%.
It jumped that much in
one decade, 6% to 23%.
Primarily, I believe,
because of the introduction
of the electronic fetal monitor
into American hospitals.
The monitor was invented in
1970 by an American physician,
an obstetrician named
Edward Hon, H-O-N.
He invented it because he
thought if he could show--
if he could find a
machine that would
show that the baby's
heart was fine
and the mother's
contractions were strong,
that he could prevent
interventions in labor--
because the machine would show
good process most of the time.
Well, once the machine got
introduced into every hospital
birth, it had exactly
the opposite effect.
Too much information
is provided by
the electronic fetal
monitor, or over here you
might call it the CTG.
It records every sign of every
fetal heart rate deceleration
and every contraction
of the mothers.
And because babies'
hearts naturally
decelerate during
labor, especially
during strong contractions,
if you don't know that,
if you don't see
every one, you're
less likely to get alarmed.
So we have four
decades of evidence
now that nurses or
midwives, or even doctors,
auscultating with the
stethoscope or the fetus scope
to hear the fetal heartbeat.
And note that every 20
minutes is much more effective
than having the
mother continuously
on the electronic monitor in
terms of improving outcomes.
We have four decades
of evidence that
show us that being
on the monitor
does not improve
outcomes in any way.
All it does is raise
the cesarean rate.
Why does it do that?
Because if you see
every deceleration,
you start to freak out.
And you go, oh, my god,
the baby's in distress.
And you rush off for a
cesarean that wasn't necessary.
And you deliver, by an
unnecessary cesarean,
a baby with an Apgar of 10
because the baby was fine
all along.
That's what birth is like
in the United States today.
Yeah, it's been-- the
electronic fetal monitor
has been massively misused.
It can be used--
you know, a 20-minute
strip every now
and then is not a bad idea.
It's just when you
put the woman on it
continuously, first of all,
that imprisons her in one place.
Well, the essence of
birth is movement.
To give birth
successfully, to help
to facilitate the normal
physiological process of birth,
the woman must be, number
one, eating and drinking
to keep her strength up.
We have so many
cesareans in the US
because women are too
hungry and too tired and too
thirsty to be able to go on,
especially if their labor goes
for more than 12 or 15 hours.
You get exhausted
and you're starving.
So eating and
drinking, number one.
The second most
important ingredient
for a successful normal
physiological birth
is movement.
Women need to be up and moving.
On a birth ball rocking
their pelvis back and forth.
Walking around.
Hopefully there's a garden
outdoors or someplace
where they can walk
in, which is not
possible in most
hospitals, but ought to be.
In New Zealand, they have these
marvelous small maternity units
and birth centers with
lovely outdoor gardens,
where women can go
be during labor.
If you stay home in labor,
you can bake a chocolate cake
or you can clean your
house a little bit.
You know, you need to
be moving constantly.
So what are the two
things you don't get
to do in American hospitals?
You don't get to eat or drink--
maybe drink a little bit,
but you don't get to eat.
In some places, yes,
they've allowed that now.
But in most places, no.
And you don't get to move.
You get to be trapped
in the bed, imprisoned
by the fetal monitor.
If you have an epidural,
even less chance of moving.
If you have an
epidural, you have
to have the monitor on because
the epidural itself can
slow labor and cause problems.
So as soon as you go
for the pain relief,
you go for the monitor
and all that that entails.
So you're trapped.
Although, I have to say, it's
important to understand--
I think nurses, and midwives
especially-- obstetricians
are not in the labor
room with the mother.
They're not there
most of the time.
They come in, do a check,
and they live again.
And then they come
in to catch the baby.
It's the nurses and the
midwives that are there.
In my country, it's
mostly the nurses,
because we only have
midwives attending
8% of American births.
In Australia, it's much more
midwives and much less nurses.
But creative nurses and creative
midwives, in both countries,
are beginning to realize that
she may be on the monitor
and she may have an epidural--
but if she wants a physiological
birth, as much as possible
given the circumstances,
we can get her up
and put her on the birth ball.
She can be on the birth
ball right next to the bed,
still with all the tethers in
the IV line and everything.
But you can rock your
pelvis on a birth ball,
even with all the
technology attached.
Or you can put the
birth bed upright.
And the mother can turn
around on her hands and knees
and drape her hands and her
arms over the top of the bed
and lean forward into the bed
and rock her pelvis that way.
Anything to keep moving is
going to greatly enhance
her chances of a normal birth.
American obstetricians
get paid--
OK, American hospitals charge
around $20,000 to $30,000
for a cesarean section.
The cost of a normal birth is
more like $8,000 to $10,000.
In other words, when I say,
normal, I have to qualify that.
Because in the US we
really don't have--
I have to repeat.
We do not have normal
physiological birth
hardly at all in my country--
maybe 3% to 4% of births.
If you take 3% of
normal hospital births
and 1% of home births
and birth center births,
you get 4% of all births
in my country are normal.
So when I say, normal, what
I really mean is vaginal.
You can have a vaginal
birth in the US
for around $8,000 or $10,000
in the hospital and, again,
a cesarean for
$20,000 to $30,000.
So obstetricians, of course,
don't take away all that money
for themselves.
But they do make around three to
four times more for a cesarean
than they do for a
vaginal delivery.
So of course-- and it's not
just that they make more
for the cesarean.
It's that it takes
them so much less time.
You can have that baby out
and have the mother sewed up
in 20 minutes.
But if it's a vaginal birth, you
have to be coming in and out,
checking on her, waiting
around in the hospital for her
to give birth.
Would you please get
this show on the road?
Let's hurry up
and move it along.
So obstetricians have every
reason to do cesareans.
One, they're de-skilled and
they don't know what else to do
for any complication--
that normally they would have
had to use vacuum forceps
or do an external version
or catch a breech baby.
They don't know how
to do any of that.
So they just jump
to the cesarean.
So that's one, they
don't know better.
Or they don't know how to do it
otherwise because they're not
taught anymore.
And number two, time,
it saves so much time.
Convenience, power.
When an obstetrician
performs a cesarean,
he or she feels the power
of life in their hands.
They deliver the
baby, quite literally.
They cut the mother
open, and they reach in
and they pull the baby out.
And I've interviewed
so many of them
and they get this little
spark in their eyes
when they talk about how cool
it is to pull a baby up out
of the womb and know that
you delivered that baby.
You brought it into the world.
You hopefully saved its life,
although most cesareans are not
life-saving,
they're unnecessary.
WHO says we should not have a
cesarean rate higher than 15%.
And now they're,
like, 15% to 20%.
You know?
I mean, I have to say,
we all in the birth world
used to think that any Cesarean
rate above 15% was terrible.
Now we think any cesarean rate
below 25% is great, you know,
because it's gotten so much
higher in so many countries
of the world.
So you know if you're
hanging out around 22%,
like the UK is,
that they're trying.
Scandinavian countries
have cesarean rates
in the high teens or low 20s.
That means they're trying really
hard not to let it go higher.
Once you get your
cesarean rate about 25%,
it becomes completely
tautological and you cannot--
it's almost impossible to
bring it back down again.
Because, you've
lost VBAC already.
We've pretty much
completely lost VBACS
in my country
because of a series
of most-unfortunate events that
happened in the early 2000s.
So no VBACS.
Doctors don't know
how to do breeches.
And again, they
jumped to cesarean
for every little thing.
So you get those
three factors in play,
and you get this escalating
rise in cesareans.
And if you have a cesarean
for the first kid,
now it's gonna be for
the second kid as well.
And you have a
34% cesarean rate.
So more and more primates
are having cesareans,
meaning more and more multips
are gonna have cesareans.
You know, plus
doctors not knowing
how to do anything else, it
just escalates from there.
And it becomes almost impossible
to stop it and bring it
back down.
So it's key for
any country who's
got a cesarean rate
under 25% to work
very hard to keep it there.
I mean, we kept our
cesarean rate in the US
at under 25% from 1980
until 2004, approximately.
And that had a lot to
do with the huge effort
that childbirth activists put
into yelling and screaming
at any percentage point
rise in the cesarean.
So it'd go up to 24%, and
then we'd yell and scream,
and it'd go back down to 21%.
And it went like that
all through the '90s,
but it never got above 25%.
And then we'd yell and scream
and it would go back down.
So we literally maintained it
that low for that long a time.
And then in around 2005, this
study was published showing--
well, ACOG, the American
College of OBGYN
came out with a statement
saying that they
thought that elective
cesareans were ethical.
So it was OK to do
cesareans for women
who just wanted
them, and didn't want
to have to go through
labor because they just
didn't want to.
So that happened.
And then a couple
of studies came out
that got very misinterpreted.
And then a study
came out about--
it was saying that there
was a much greater risk
of uterine rupture with VBAC.
And that was a very
unfortunate study.
That was Mona
Lydon-Rochelle's study.
And what her study
actually showed--
and this was around 2005.
What her study actually showed
was that the more Pitocin
you use during a
VBAC, the greater
your chance of uterine rupture.
So the logical
conclusion would be,
don't use Pitocin with a VBAC.
Hello?
But doctors in my country
are so used to using Pitocin,
they literally do not know how
to do births without inducing
and augmenting with Pitocin.
So they couldn't
imagine not doing births
with Pitocin, because to them,
birth equals Pitocin induction
and augmentation.
So the conclusion
that they reached
was, don't do VBACs
anymore, except in
high-level tertiary
care hospitals
with 24/7
anesthesiology on call.
Because of course we're gonna
use Pitocin, so of course
the risk of uterine
rupture is gonna be higher.
So that's why we started.
That's really--
those two things,
the ACOG statement saying that
it was ethical to do elective
cesareans, the Mona
Lydon-Rochelle study,
which doctors interpreted to
mean you should never do--
that VBACs lead to higher
risk of uterine rupture.
And there was one other thing.
Oh, and the loss of
breech deliveries,
the high fear of breech.
All of those things just--
from then on, the cesarean rate
from 24% up to the current 34%.
And it's rising at a
percentage point a year.
So, unlikely that we'll
be able to bring it
back down, unless somebody
figures out that-- gee-whiz,
we could do VBACs
without Pitocin.
And guess what?
They'd be a whole lot safer.
And if somebody would
figure that out,
then we might be able to
start bringing it down again.
With the breech issue,
there are researchers
all over the world,
in Europe especially,
and in other places, who are
working very hard on bringing
back vaginal breech.
Because now we have some
large-scale trials showing
that, in fact--
with skilled hands,
in skilled care,
with people who know
how to attend to breech,
vaginal breech can be a very
successful and safe mode
of delivery.
But it's scary
for practitioners.
But you have to know what to do.
You have to know how to let
the baby's butt come out.
And then you have to know how
to put your fingers in and pull
the neck down like this
or flex the head here.
You have to keep
the head like that.
And it's only 3% of deliveries.
But 3% of millions of
births is a lot of births.
You know?
So there are some
practitioners that
are trying to teach others to
help them re-skill themselves
in vaginal breech.
So there's a slight movement
toward that around the world.
So it's not impossible to
bring cesarean rates down.
But again, you'd
have to have people
who are losing their fear
of birth and developing
confidence, and people
who truly understand
the scientific evidence.
If a study shows that
rates of uterine rupture
are higher when you
use Pitocin in a VBAC,
then make the logical
conclusion and don't
use Pitocin for a VBAC.
Try patience instead.
I've noticed in recent
years, it seems to me anyway,
women used to be afraid of
cesareans back in my day.
And now women are often
afraid of vaginal birth,
more so than of cesareans.
Because so many people
are having cesareans,
and the baby's fine
and the mother's fine,
and they note that they didn't
have to go through labor pain
if it's a scheduled cesarean.
And as you see movie stars
doing that more and more,
then it begins to
appear to be normative.
And you begin to think,
well, why should I
go through all that
mess and that fuss
and that bother
and all the pain.
And, you know, why bother
even with an epidural?
Why don't I just
schedule my cesarean?
So we do see an uptick
in elective cesareans
around the world.
In developed countries--
not around the world,
just in developed countries.
We also see, in the US,
an uptick in home births.
It's very interesting.
I got a lot of calls to
be interviewed last month
in the US because the
home birth rate doubled.
It went from-- no, sorry.
The home birth rate rose by 20%.
It went from .06% to point .08%.
But that was apparently
a big enough deal
to generate some media
publicity around it.
So I got all these questions
about why American women are
choosing home birth, and
which, precisely, women are.
Well, inevitably
in every country
I visit, when women
actively choose
home birth in a
developed country,
it is because they are
informed and educated
and they understand that
home birth will give them
the best chance of a safe normal
physiological birth-- home
birth with a skilled assistant;
especially planned home
birth with a midwife.
So those choices are
informed and educated.
And I think the media
in the US pay attention
because it is this cohort
of highly educated, middle
and upper class
white women that are
choosing to give birth at home.
And they are all the more
reinforced in those choices
when they see that the
cesarean rate in the US
has gone up to 34%,
and they realize
that they have
over a one in three
chance of having cesarean
if they go to the hospital.
So they increasingly
are choosing
to stay home so that
they can be safe
and protected from the
interventions of the hospital.
Which is so ironic because it
is those hospital interventions
that were supposed
to be lifesaving,
to keep women safe.
And now women are
saying, no, it's
more dangerous in the hospital.
Look what they're
doing to people.
I'm staying home
because that's where
I'll be safe and protected.
There's a spectrum
of choice in birth.
And that spectrum extends
from unassisted, birth at home
or free birth--
without any attendants around.
Then the spectrum
of choice moves
from those unassisted births to
a planned midwife-attended home
birth; to a birth center
birth; to a hospital
birth with a midwife in a
small community hospital;
to birth in larger tertiary
care centers with midwives
and obstetricians in
attendance; and then
all the way to the scheduled
elective cesareans.
That is the spectrum of choice.
When you're planning a birth
you have, ideally open to you,
that full spectrum of choice.
If we lost home
birth, the spectrum
would narrow to choice of
birth center, small hospital
or large hospital,
or elective cesarean.
And if we lost birth centers,
it would narrow even further.
And all the knowledge
about vaginal breeches
and external versions and how
to deal with shoulder dystocias
without resorting to
cesareans-- all that knowledge
would be lost.
Because only those
people who operate
on this side of the spectrum
are preserving those skills
that on this side of
the spectrum people
are losing or have already lost.
So it is essential for
the health and well-being
of the maternity care
system in any society
to keep the full spectrum open.
It is absolutely essential.
Now, I honor women's
right to choose along
that full spectrum.
But I deeply question
the cultural influences
that mold and shape women's
choices, which are primarily
for this end of the spectrum.
We are raised in
a culture of fear.
We fear nature in general
because we live so far removed
from it.
We fear birth as a
chaotic natural process.
We fear pain, because we're
raised to be so comfortable all
the time, to adjust the
air conditioning if it gets
a little hot or a little cold.
We're not supposed
to be uncomfortable.
So why go through
pain and birth?
So all of our cultural
conditioning shape
moves us away from this
part of the spectrum, which
is why it's so culturally
marginal and so much less
percentage-wise than this
part, and toward this highly
technocratic approach to birth.
So if you're choosing
this approach,
if you're choosing a
scheduled cesarean,
I would never question
your right to do that.
But I would ask, is your
choice truly informed
or is it simply culturally
shaped and molded?
It is common for countries
with good mortality rates,
like Australia, to say--
well, our mortality
rates are great.
So what's the problem?
What are you complaining about?
OK, so in Australia, you
have a 33% cesarean rate.
But our perinatal mortality
rate is 10 per 1,000.
And that's really--
that's higher
than it really is because
you guys are taking
perinatal mortality over
here from 20 weeks, which
includes planned abortions
and miscarriages.
And that's really not
fair to yourselves.
Most countries take perinatal
mortality from 28 weeks.
Well, if you have a perinatal
mortality rate of 10 per 1,000
from 20 weeks, if you
move it to 28 weeks
it's gonna be way lower.
So yes, your outcomes are great.
And your maternal mortality
rates are really low.
In the US, maternal
mortality has
doubled in the last 10 years.
It went from 8 per
100,000 to 17 per 100,000,
because of excessive
interventions,
because women are
dying from infections.
But here in Australia, you're
doing good with mortality.
So what's the problem?
The problem is not
mortality over here,
it's morbidity and
quality of experience.
You know?
Just because you save
mothers and babies
and they're not dying, doesn't
mean their birth experience
was OK with them.
If a woman really
wants a normal birth,
and she ends up with an
unnecessary cesarean,
or with a highly interventionist
medical birth against her will;
if she ends up being put on
Pitocin when she didn't want
to, for example, and having
a much more painful labor
as a result, she is
going to feel traumatized
at the end of her
birth experience.
Traumatized mothers,
of whom there
are many running around
Australia and the US
these days, have a much
more difficult time
taking care of their children.
They have more
difficulty breastfeeding.
They may have more trouble
with postnatal depression.
They have more trouble with
post-traumatic stress disorder.
It makes their family
lives much more difficult.
So it's not OK just to
say, oh, it's all good
because they're alive.
What is their quality
of life is the question
you need to be asking.
Around this issue
of quality of care,
as opposed to low
mortality rates,
we could look at New Zealand.
New Zealand also has
very low mortality rates.
It's perinatal mortality rate
is the same as Australia's.
But quality of care is a big
deal for New Zealand mothers
and midwives.
So they have excellent
outcomes just like you
do in terms of mortality.
But they have a better
quality of care,
so they have happier
mothers and happier babies.
The maternity care system in
New Zealand, in my opinion,
is the best in the world.
I used to think the
Netherlands was the best,
and now I would
rate it number two,
but New Zealand I
would rate number one.
Why?
Because, first of all,
100% of New Zealand births
are attended by midwives.
Second of all a, mother
has her full choice
to pick a lead maternity care.
They call it LMC.
And that can be a midwife,
it can be an obstetrician,
or it can be a GP.
Well, when the midwives
set this up in the 1990s,
obstetricians went along
with it because they
thought the lead maternity
care would be them.
Ironically enough, 80%
of New Zealand women
pick a midwife to be their
lead maternity carer.
Now, New Zealand
midwives are all
about normal
physiological birth.
It's the model that
they're taught.
And all their skills
in school and what
they learn in
midwifery training is
how to facilitate normal
physiological birth.
Many of them do get
out-of-hospital experience.
Many of the student trainees do
see normal physiological birth,
a lot more than they do
in most other countries.
In the US, like I
said, you hardly
ever see a normal physiological
birth in a hospital.
But in New Zealand
hospitals, there's
a lot of normal birth going on.
And in New Zealand
homes and birth centers
there's a lot of
normal birth going on.
Also, New Zealand has these
things called maternity units.
They're little
community hospitals
that specialize
in birth out there
in the boonies and
various rural areas.
And they're charming and cozy.
And maybe they were
built 50, 60 years ago,
so they had that
slightly funky feel.
But they'll have two
or three birth rooms.
And so women can stay in their
communities to give birth.
So home birth in New
Zealand is around 8%.
It would be higher,
except that women
love these small
rural maternity units.
And they know that if
they don't utilize them
they will be closed.
Plus, New Zealand
has a whole rash
of new shiny, lovely,
urban birth centers--
that I got the good
fortune to visit--
that have the tubs and
the ropes to pull on
and the sling to hang
yourself in from the ceiling
and spin around, so you can
rock your pelvis really well
during birth.
And every maternity
facility in New Zealand
has two kinds of midwives.
There's core midwives,
who stay in the facility--
whether it's the small maternity
unit or the urban birth
center or the hospital.
There's a core midwife,
who's on shift there
and is always there--
according to her shift.
And then there are caseload
midwives in New Zealand.
And the caseload midwives
take on clients one to one.
Maybe there will
be three midwives
in a caseload practice.
And they'll take on a
certain number of women
per year, maybe 40, maybe 50.
New Zealand midwives have
full freedom of choice
in what their
caseload is according
to their level of
ability to work,
their family responsibilities,
et cetera-- all government
funded.
So the caseload midwife
promises the client
that out of the three midwives
in that caseload practice,
all of her 40 clients through
that year, all of them
will be with at least
one of those three
all the way through labor and
birth and will not be left.
So if the birth starts at
home or in a maternity unit
or in a birth center, the
caseload midwife is there.
If it's a transfer
to a hospital,
the caseload midwives goes
there and stays with the mother
all the way through
the birth, working in
tandem and collaboration
with the core midwife
and with the obstetricians
if necessary.
Now, that's a vast improvement
over the Dutch system, where
if the mother needs to
transport from home to hospital,
the midwife will drop
her off at the hospital,
tuck her in and leave.
You know, not stay with her,
because the midwives' caseloads
in the Netherlands are too high.
They have to do over
100 a year, which
is unreasonable to
require of any midwife.
So they'll dump off the
mother at the hospital
and go rushing off to do
their prenatals and postnatals
that they have to do.
In Australia, if a home birth
midwife starts out with you,
and you go to the hospital,
often she will leave you there.
She might have to
leave you there
because she won't be
welcomed into the hospital.
She might want to go with you,
but she won't be welcomed.
So New Zealand has it all over
Australia and the Netherlands
in terms of quality of
care and continuity of care
and of carer.
It's really interesting
to ask ourselves
why women tolerate the
often abusive treatment
that they receive in hospitals,
if not overtly abusive,
at least disrespectful.
And if not disrespectful,
at least supercilious
in a way, arrogant.
Obstetricians are
likely to just dismiss
a woman's wants and needs
and feelings and say, well,
it's going to be this way.
And why do women
put up with that?
I have interviewed a lot of
women about exactly that.
And I also, at this recent
Australian home birth
conference that I just
attended, there were women--
there were several
panels of women telling
their experiences of HBAC--
what they're calling
HBAC back over here,
home birth after cesarean.
And it amazed me
how these women, who
had had terrible
hospital experiences,
it took them two
cesarean sometimes
to decide to leave the hospital
and go home to give birth
under their own power.
It took them many
experiences of doctors
being negative or arrogant
or discounting their wishes
before they'd finally decide,
two weeks before they were due,
that they couldn't
take it anymore
and they just had to get out of
there and give birth at home.
How much do women have to go
through before they finally
vote with their feet and go
decide to opt-out of the system
altogether?
And it's a lot.
Women have a lot of tolerance.
They may get upset by
their medical treatment,
but they tolerate it
and they accept it
because they are scared not
to give birth in the hospital.
It's all about fear.
You put up with a lot
from practitioners
you might not even
like that much,
just so that you'll feel safe
giving birth in a hospital.
And you think, well, I won't
die and my baby won't die.
Even if I don't like
the doctor, even
if the midwife is mean to me--
whatever it takes, because
I have to protect my baby
and I have to
protect my own life.
So that's why it
takes women so long.
And when they're finally
pushed beyond their limits
to simply not be able to
take that negative treatment
anymore, and then they
look at home birth
and then they start to--
that's when they start
to do the research.
They start to ask, would it
be possible and how dangerous
is it if I put my
own feelings first
and choose to give
birth at home?
And then they do the
research and they
realize that home
birth is actually
safer than hospital birth.
And they get very
excited because now it's
not about being selfish.
It's about making the right
and the informed choice.
To transform birth
in any society,
the first thing is
education of women
and the entire populace in
normal physiological birth,
and in the notion that birth
is a normal life event.
Young girls have to-- and young
boys, need to be told that
and believe that and get
that from a very early age
before they can get scared.
Number two, and the quickest and
first and foremost thing to do,
is to change the
education of OBGYNs.
They need to be trained in
normal physiological birth.
And they need to be taught
that midwives are the guise
and guardians of normal birth.
OBs need to know how to do it.
And they need to know how to
perform the skills that they
might need to perform-- like a
vacuum extraction to keep birth
physiological and not--
or vaginal and not a cesarean.
But they also need to understand
that their role should
be limited to backup
for the midwives.
Midwives should be
doing 70% to 80%
of the births in most countries.
And OBs should be
doing 20%, around.
Because they should be there
when their skills are truly
needed for truly pathological
occurrences, or truly high-risk
situations.
They should not have their
hands into normal birth.
If, with their current
desire to seduce cesareans,
they would confine
themselves to the few cases
where it's really
necessary to do a cesarean,
we wouldn't have a problem.
It's because OBs are in
there attending women
they shouldn't even be around.
Because they're not
needed for those women.